MODEL EMPLOYEE HANDBOOK 
FOR SMALL BUSINESS
  INTRODUCTION 
 
The NFIB Legal Foundation is pleased to provide you with this Model Employee 
Handbook for Small Business. This handbook is intended to assist you in creating your 
own custom employee handbook. The actual polices and procedures of your business 
may vary due to the size of the company, the number of employees, benefits offered 
and other factors. The handbook is therefore intentionally broad, and should be 
modified and supplemented to accurately reflect your individual company’s needs.  
 
While the information provided within this handbook is intended to be complete and 
accurate, it should not be considered legal advice. Employment laws vary from state to 
state, and it would be impracticable to provide a detailed employment handbook 
tailored to each locale. The authors and publishers cannot be held responsible for any 
errors or omissions. This handbook is provided with the understanding that neither the 
authors nor the publishers are supplying legal or professional advice.  
  
The guidance and participation of a good attorney is invaluable when creating an 
effective employee handbook. For more information, contact an employment attorney 
licensed to practice in your area. If you need assistance in finding an attorney, visit the 
American Bar Association Lawyer Referral Service at www.abanet.org/legalservices/ 
lris/directory.html or contact (800) 285-2221 for your state or county bar association. 
 
The NFIB Legal Foundation is a 501(c)(3), nonprofit, public interest law firm dedicated 
to the principles of justice and equity for small business. The Legal Foundation protects 
the rights of America’s small-business owners by providing guidance on legal issues 
and by ensuring that the voice of small business is heard in the nation’s courts. The 
Legal Foundation does not rely on NFIB Member dues. Rather, the Foundation is 
supported through individual contributions. For more information on the Foundation’s 
courtroom activity or how to support this worthy cause, please call (800) 552-6342 or 
visit the “Get More Involved” section of the NFIB’s homepage at www.nfib.com. 
 
 
 
 
National Federation of Independent Business 
1201 F. Street NW, Suite 200 * Washington, DC 20004 * 202-554-9000
The purpose of an employee handbook is to orient new employees with the company. It 
is a resource that provides answers for the most frequently asked employee questions. 
Besides informing new employees about company policy, a good handbook emphasizes 
the at-will nature of the employment and the company’s disciplinary and termination 
rights. Most importantly, it is a declaration of the employer’s rights and expectations. 
 
To prepare a handbook, review your company’s policies. Decide which policies are 
fundamental, which need adjustment and which should be removed. This model 
handbook is intended to help in that review process. In addition, the model handbook 
may include policies that your company does not. In some cases, a specific policy that 
has been included in the model handbook might not apply to your company.  For 
instance, if your company does not offer health insurance to your employees, you 
would not include a section on health insurance or COBRA.  At a minimum your 
employee handbook should contain the following six items:  (1) an employment at-will 
disclaimer (section 1.3); (2) a statement regarding equal employment opportunity 
(section 2.1); (3) a policy prohibiting unlawful discrimination and harassment (section 
2.2); (4) a section that describes the policy for use of company property and privacy 
rules (section 3); (5) a section on employment classification and overtime rules 
(section4); (6) a policy on Family and Medical Leave if you have 50 or more employees 
(section 6.3); and (7) a section on Safety (section 9).  You should also consider including 
a disciplinary guideline (section 8). 
 
 
Throughout the handbook, you will note symbols similar to this. These symbols 
indicate a helpful tip or legal alert.  Many of the topics covered in the handbook 
are legal in nature, but not all sections have a symbol. If you are unsure or 
unfamiliar with a section, research the law, contact the proper agency or consult 
an attorney.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
i
Table of Contents 
1. Welcome 
1.1. 
History, Goals & Culture 
1.2. 
Purpose of Handbook 
1.3. 
At-Will Employment 
 
2. Workplace Commitments 
2.1. 
Equal Opportunity Employment 
2.2. 
Non-Harassment / Non-Discrimination 
2.3. 
Drug Free / Alcohol Free 
2.4. 
Open Door Policy 
 
3. Company Policy and Procedures 
3.1. 
Code of Professional Conduct 
3.2. 
Dress Code 
3.3. 
Payday 
3.4. 
Company Property 
3.5. 
Privacy  
3.6. 
Personnel Files 
 
4. Employment Classification 
4.1. 
Exempt 
4.2. 
Non-Exempt 
4.3. 
Part-Time, Full-Time or Temporary Status 
 
5. Attendance Policies 
5.1. 
General Attendance 
5.2. 
Tardiness 
5.3. 
Breaks 
 
6. Leave Policies 
6.1. 
Vacation 
6.2. 
Sick Leave 
6.3. 
Family and Medical Leave Act 
6.4. 
Holidays 
6.5. 
Jury Duty 
6.6. 
Voting 
6.7. 
Military Leave 
6.8. 
Leave of Absence 
 
ii
 
7. Work Performance 
7.1. 
Expectations 
7.2. 
Reviews 
7.3. 
Insubordination 
 
8. Discipline Policy 
8.1. 
Grounds for Disciplinary Action 
8.2. 
Procedures 
8.3. 
Termination 
 
9. Employee Health and Safety 
9.1. 
Workplace Safety 
9.2. 
Workplace Security 
9.3. 
Emergency Procedures 
 
10. Benefits 
10.1. Health Insurance 
10.2. Retirement Plans 
10.3. Worker’s Compensation 
10.4. Disability 
 
11. Termination Policies 
11.1. Voluntary Termination 
11.2. Final Paycheck 
11.3. COBRA Continuation of Benefits 
11.4. Exit Interview 
 
12. Acknowledgments of Receipt 
12.1. Employee Copy 
12.2. Employer Copy 
 
 
Using a table of contents with section indicators rather than just 
page numbers makes the handbook easy to update. Begin new 
sections on a new page, leaving room for future adjustments if 
possible.  
 
iii
Section 1 - Welcome 
1.1 
History, Goals & Culture 
This section should welcome the new employee and introduce them to 
the character of the company.  Write briefly about how the company 
began and who is in charge. Describe the company’s goals, philosophy 
and core principles. Avoid describing the company like a family, as that 
might imply indefinite employment. 
1.2 
Purpose of this Handbook 
This handbook has been prepared to inform new employees of the policies and 
procedures of this company and to establish the company’s expectations. It is not all-
inclusive or intended to provide strict interpretations of our policies; rather, it offers an 
overview of the work environment. This handbook is not a contract, expressed or 
implied, guarantying employment for any length of time and is not intended to induce 
an employee to accept employment with the company.  
The company reserves the right to unilaterally revise, suspend, revoke, terminate or 
change any of its policies, in whole or in part, whether described within this handbook 
or elsewhere, in its sole discretion. If any discrepancy between this handbook and 
current company policy arises, conform to current company policy. Every effort will be 
made to keep you informed of the company’s policies, however we cannot guarantee 
that notice of revisions will be provided.  Feel free to ask questions about any of the 
information within this handbook.   
This handbook supersedes and replaces any and all personnel policies and manuals 
previously distributed, made available or applicable to employees. 
1.3 
At-Will Employment 
Employment at this company is at-will. An at-will employment relationship can be 
terminated at any time, with or without reason or notice by either the employer or the 
employee. This at-will employment relationship exists regardless of any statements by 
office personnel to the contrary.  Only [enter authorized person’s name] is authorized to 
modify the at-will nature of the employment relationship, and the modification must be 
in writing. 
Sections 1.2 and 1.3 are essential items for a handbook. Employers are 
vulnerable to lawsuits if they do not provide statements regarding the non-
contractual nature of the handbook or at-will employment. Employees should
also agree to these terms on the “Acknowledgment of Receipt” form.  Some 
states limit the terms of at-will employment, so consult with an employment 
attorney regarding your state’s laws. 
1
Section 2 – Workplace Commitments 
2.1 
Equal Opportunity Employment 
This company is an equal opportunity employer and does not unlawfully discriminate 
against employees or applicants for employment on the basis of an individual’s race, 
color, religion, creed, sex, national origin, age, disability, marital status, veteran status 
or any other status protected by applicable law. This policy applies to all terms, 
conditions and privileges of employment, including recruitment, hiring, placement, 
compensation, promotion, discipline and termination.   
Whenever possible, the company makes reasonable accommodations for qualified 
individuals with disabilities to the extent required by law.  Employees who would like 
to request a reasonable accommodation should contact [enter authorized person’s 
name].  
Several laws enforced by the U.S. Equal Opportunity Employment Commission 
prohibit workplace discrimination. The Americans with Disabilities Act requires 
employers to provide, among other things, reasonable accommodations to 
qualified individuals with disabilities unless to do so would cause an undue 
hardship to the company.  Include an equal opportunity statement and a 
disability statement to exhibit that your company observes these laws.  The 
company should be aware of state and/or local laws which provide greater 
protection than the federal discrimination laws, such as recognizing additional 
protected classes beyond those protected by federal statute. 
2.2 
Non-Harassment Policy / Non-Discrimination Policy 
This company prohibits discrimination or harassment based on race, color, religion, 
creed, sex, national origin, age, disability, marital status, veteran status or any other 
status protected by applicable law. Each individual has the right to work in a 
professional atmosphere that promotes equal employment opportunities and is free 
from discriminatory practices, including without limitation harassment.  Consistent 
with its workplace policy of equal employment opportunity, the company prohibits and 
will not tolerate harassment on the basis of race, color, religion, creed, sex, national 
origin, age, disability, marital status, veteran status or any other status protected by 
applicable law.  Violations of this policy will not be tolerated.  
Discrimination includes, but is not limited to: making any employment decision or 
employment related action on the basis of race, color, religion, creed, age, sex, disability, 
national origin, marital or veteran status, or any other status protected by applicable 
law. 
2
Harassment is generally defined as unwelcome verbal or non-verbal conduct, based 
upon a person’s protected characteristic, that denigrates or shows hostility or aversion 
toward the person because of the characteristic, and which affects the person’s 
employment opportunities or benefits, has the purpose or effect of unreasonably 
interfering with the person’s work performance, or has the purpose or effect of creating 
an intimidating, hostile or offensive working environment.  Harassing conduct 
includes, but is not limited to: epithets; slurs or negative stereotyping; threatening, 
intimidating or hostile acts; denigrating jokes and display or circulation in the 
workplace of written or graphic material that denigrates or shows hostility or aversion 
toward an individual or group based on their protected characteristic.  
Sexual harassment is defined as unwelcome sexual advances, requests for sexual favors 
and other verbal, visual or physical conduct of a sexual nature, when: 
1.
submission to such conduct is made either explicitly or implicitly a term
or condition of an individual’s employment;
2.
submission to or rejection of such conduct by an individual is used as the
basis for employment decisions affecting such individual; or
3.
such conduct has the purpose or effect of unreasonably interfering with an
individual’s work performance or creating an intimidating, hostile or
offensive working environment.
Examples of sexual harassment include: unwelcome or unsolicited sexual advances; 
displaying sexually suggestive material; unwelcome sexual flirtations, advances or 
propositions; suggestive comments; verbal abuse of a sexual nature; sexually oriented 
jokes; crude or vulgar language or gestures; graphic or verbal commentaries about an 
individual’s body; display or distribution of obscene materials; physical contact such as 
patting, pinching or brushing against someone’s body; or physical assault of a sexual 
nature.  
Reporting: 
Any company employee who feels that he or she has been harassed or discriminated 
against, or has witnessed or become aware of discrimination or harassment in violation 
of these policies, should bring the matter to the immediate attention of his or her 
supervisor or [enter name of alternative person to whom employees can report].  The 
company will promptly investigate all allegations of discrimination and harassment, 
and take action as appropriate based on the outcome of the investigation.  An 
investigation and its results will be treated as confidential to the extent feasible, and the 
company will take appropriate action based on the outcome of the investigation.   
3
No employee will be retaliated against for making a complaint in good faith regarding a 
violation of these policies, or for participating in good faith in an investigation pursuant 
to these policies.  If an employee feels he/she has been retaliated against, the employee 
should file a complaint using the procedures set forth above. 
It is important for employers to implement non-harassment policies, including a 
provision regarding reporting procedures. To the extent that an employee fails to 
report harassment by a co-employee as required by an established policy, this 
may be a possible defense in response to a legal action initiated by the 
employee.  Once in place, the company should make sure that the policy is 
carried out, including prompt investigation of claims of discrimination and 
harassment. 
2.3 
Drug-Free / Alcohol-Free Environment 
Employees are prohibited from unlawfully consuming, distributing, possessing, selling, 
or using controlled substances while on duty. In addition, employees may not be under 
the influence of any controlled substance, such as drugs or alcohol, while at work, on 
company premises or engaged in company business. Prescription drugs or over-the-
counter medications, taken as prescribed, are an exception to this policy.  
Anyone violating this policy may be subject to disciplinary action, up to and including 
termination.  
2.4 
Open Door Policy 
The company has an open door policy and takes employee concerns and problems 
seriously.  The company values each employee and strives to provide a positive work 
experience. Employees are encouraged to bring any workplace concerns or problems 
they might have or know about to their supervisor or some other member of 
management.  
4
Section 3 – Company Policies and Procedures 
3.1 
Professional Conduct 
This company expects its employees to adhere to a standard of professional conduct 
and integrity. This ensures that the work environment is safe, comfortable and 
productive. Employees should be respectful, courteous, and mindful of others’ feelings 
and needs. General cooperation between coworkers and supervisors is expected. 
Individuals who act in an unprofessional manner may be subject to disciplinary action. 
3.2 
Dress Code 
An employee’s personal appearance and hygiene is a reflection on the company’s 
character. Employees are expected to dress appropriately for their individual work 
responsibilities and position.  
This section may be expanded to include the specific requirements of your 
company. Include information regarding uniforms, safety protections such as 
steel toe shoes or hairnets, or other dress requirements. If the company provides
uniforms, consider including a caveat about lost uniform charges or laundry. 
3.3 
Payday 
Paychecks are distributed every 2 weeks, on Friday after 8:00 a.m., based on timesheets 
submitted two weeks prior.   If the pay date lands on a holiday, paychecks will be 
distributed on the closest business day before the holiday.  
The paycheck will reflect work performed for the previous period. Paychecks include 
salary or wages earned less any mandatory or elected deductions. Mandatory 
deductions include federal or state withholding tax, and other withholdings for 
insurance and retirement. Elected deductions are deductions authorized by the 
employee, and may include, for example, contributions to benefit plans.  Employees 
may contact Human Resources to obtain the necessary authorization forms for 
requesting additional deductions from their paychecks. 
Notify a supervisor if the paycheck appears to be inaccurate or if it has been misplaced. 
The company reserves the right to charge a replacement fee for any lost paychecks. 
Advances on paychecks are not permitted. Information regarding final paychecks can 
be found under the termination section of this handbook. 
5
Any change in name, address, telephone number, marital status or number of 
exemptions claimed by an employee must be reported to Human Resources 
immediately. 
Companies should consult state and local law for wage payment requirements, 
such as means of payment (including opportunity to pay by direct deposit), 
timeframe for paying wages, and information that must be included on paycheck 
stubs. 
3.4 
Company Property 
Company property, such as equipment, vehicles, telephones, computers, and software, 
is not for private use. These devices are to be used strictly for company business, and 
are not permitted off grounds unless authorized. Company property must be used in 
the manner for which it was intended. Upon termination, employees are required to 
surrender any company property they possess.  
Company computers, internet and emails are a privileged resource, and must be used 
only to complete essential job-related functions. Employees are not permitted to 
download any “pirated” software, files or programs and must receive permission from 
a supervisor before installing any new software on a company computer. Files or 
programs stored on company computers may not be copied for personal use.  
Phones are provided for business use. The company requests that employees not 
receive personal calls while on duty. If urgent, please keep personal calls to a minimum 
and conversations brief. Personal long distance calls are not permitted.  
Employees are reminded that they should have no expectation of privacy in their use of 
company computers or other electronic equipment. 
Violations of these policies could result in disciplinary action.  
Companies may institute a policy of “business use only.”  Alternatively, a 
company may adopt a less stringent policy which advises employees that 
computers and phones are provided for business use, and any personal use 
must be kept to a minimum and must not interfere with work responsibilities.  
Companies should develop a policy specific to their own computer systems that 
protects against employee misuse and the computer viruses that may result from
downloading outside materials. 
6
3.5 
Privacy 
Employees and employers share a relationship based on trust and mutual respect. 
However, the company retains the right to access all company property including 
computers, desks, file cabinets, storage facilities, and files and folders, electronic or 
otherwise, at any time. Employees should not entertain any expectations of privacy 
when on company grounds or while using company property.  
All documents, files, voice-mails and electronic information, including e-mails and 
other communications, created, received or maintained on or through company 
property are the property of the company, not the employee.  Therefore employees 
should have no expectation of privacy over those files or documents.  
If you plan to enforce a privacy policy, ensure that you are very explicit about 
what the company expects. Privacy laws are relatively new and vary from state 
to state. Consult with an employment attorney regarding your state’s privacy 
laws. 
3.6 
Personnel Files 
The company maintains a personnel file on each employee. These files are kept 
confidential to the extent possible. Employees may review their personnel file upon 
request.  
It is important that personnel files accurately reflect each employee’s personal 
information. Employees are expected to inform the company of any change in name, 
address, home phone number, home address, marital status, number of dependents or 
emergency contact information. 
Employers should consult state and local law regarding any provisions relating to
employee access to personnel files.  In the absence of such a provision, the 
company may not be required to allow employees to have access to their 
personnel files.  However, the company may nonetheless allow employees to 
have access.  In the event that a company allows employee access, the 
company may want to consider limiting the access to by appointment only during 
normal business hours. 
7
Section 4 - Employment Classification 
This company assigns positions, determines wages and compensates employees for 
overtime in accordance with state and local laws and the Fair Labor Standards Act.  
4.1 
Exempt Employees 
Exempt employees are those that are excluded from the overtime pay requirements of 
the Fair Labor Standards Act. Exempt employees are paid a salary and are expected to 
work beyond their normal work hours whenever necessary to accomplish the work of 
the company.  Exempt employees are not eligible to receive overtime compensation.  
Employees should consult with an administrator if they have questions regarding their 
classification as an exempt employee.  
The Fair Labor Standards Act provides narrow provisions for who qualifies for 
exempt employee status. Consult the Department of Labor’s website at 
http://www.dol.gov/esa/regs/ compliance/whd/hrg.htm#2 for more information. 
4.2 
Non-Exempt Employees 
Non-exempt employees are those eligible for overtime pay of 1.5 times the regular 
hourly rate of pay for all hours worked over 40 per work week. All overtime must be 
approved in advance.  Employees should consult with an administrator if they have 
questions regarding their classification as a non-exempt employee.  
The Fair Labor Standards Act limits the employers that must pay overtime 
wages to employees, to those engaged in “interstate commerce” and other 
particular types of businesses.  Companies should consult an attorney if there 
is a question about an obligation to pay overtime wages.  Companies should 
also consult state and local law regarding broader overtime coverage than is 
provided under the federal Fair Labor Standards Act.  For example, some 
jurisdictions may require companies to pay overtime for all hours work in a day 
over 8 hours, rather than using the federal standard of paying overtime for all 
hours worked over 40 hours in a given work week. 
8
4.3 
Part Time, Full Time or Temporary Status 
Part-time or full-time status depends on the number of hours per week an employee 
works. Regular employees who work fewer than 40 hours receive part-time 
classification.  Part-time employees are not eligible for employee benefits as described 
in this handbook.  Regular employees who work at least 40 hours receive full-time 
classification.  
From time to time the company may hire employees for specific projects or periods of 
time.  Temporary employees may work either part-time or full-time, but generally are 
scheduled to terminate by a certain date. Temporary employees who remain on duty 
past the scheduled termination remain classified as temporary. Only company 
management may change an employee’s temporary status. Temporary employees are 
not eligible for employment benefits.  
9
Section 5 – Attendance Policies 
5.1 
General 
Attendance 
The company maintains normal working hours of 8 a.m. to 5 p.m.   Hours may vary 
depending on work location and job responsibilities.  Supervisors will provide 
employees with their work schedule.  Should an employee have any questions 
regarding his/her work schedule, the employee should contact the supervisor. 
The company does not tolerate absenteeism without excuse. Employees who will be late 
to or absent from work should notify a supervisor in advance, or as soon as practicable 
in the event of an emergency. Chronic absenteeism may result in disciplinary action.  
Employees who need to leave early, for illness or otherwise, should inform a supervisor 
before departure. Unauthorized departures may result in disciplinary action.  
5.2 
Tardiness 
Employees are expected to arrive on time and ready for work. An employee who 
arrives 5 minutes after their scheduled arrival time is considered tardy. The company 
recognizes that situations arise which hinder punctuality; regardless, excessive 
tardiness is prohibited, and may be subject to disciplinary action. 
5.3 
Breaks 
When working conditions permit, and pending a supervisor’s approval, employees are 
entitled to one paid 15 minute break for every 4 hours worked.  
Meal periods are for 30 minutes, are unpaid, and must be approved by a supervisor.  
The laws regarding break and meal periods are different for each state. Consult
with an employment attorney regarding your state’s laws.  
10
Section 6 – Leave Policies  
6.1 
Vacations 
The company provides, as a benefit, paid vacations for its eligible employees. Forward 
requests for time off in advance to a supervisor, who may approve or deny the request 
based on company resources. The company is flexible in approving time off when doing 
so would not interfere with company operations. Vacation days are granted only in full 
hourly units (ex. - 3 hours, NOT 2 hours 50 minutes). 
A regular employee is eligible to receive paid time off after 3 months of full-time 
service. Accrued time off may be taken after 12 months.  Employees must earn and 
accrue vacation benefits before they may be used. Employees should consult Human 
Resources regarding the amount of vacation leave they accrue each pay period. 
Any remaining accrued time off may be accumulated or carried forward into the next 
year, but cannot exceed 10 days of carryover. Vacation benefits do not accrue during 
any period of extended leave of absence.  
Generally, states do not require vacation benefits for employees, but most 
employers offer this benefit. If you have a set vacation accrual for your 
company, insert it into this section. Replace this section if your company 
provides paid time off instead of vacation and sick leave.   
6.2 
Sick Leave 
Situations may arise where an employee needs to take time off to address medical or 
other health concerns. The company requests that employees provide notification to 
their supervisor as soon as practicable when taking time off. Sick days are granted on a 
[paid/unpaid] basis to regular employees. Employees may consult [enter authorized 
person’s name] regarding the amount of (paid) sick leave provided each year.  Sick days 
may not be carried over into the next year. Abuse of this policy may result in 
disciplinary action.  
6.3 
Family and Medical Leave Act Leave 
The company offers leave consistent with the requirements of the federal Family and 
Medical Leave Act (FMLA). Under the FMLA, an employee may be eligible for an 
11
unpaid family and medical leave of absence under certain circumstances, if the employee 
works within a seventy-five (75) mile radius of fifty (50) or more company employees.   
 
Under the federal FMLA, a person who has worked as an employee of this company for 
at least 1,250 hours for twelve months is eligible for FMLA leave. Up to twelve weeks of 
unpaid leave per year is available for the following reasons: 
- 
The birth of a child and to care for the newborn child; 
- 
Placement of a child into adoptive or foster care with the employee; 
- 
Care for a spouse, son, daughter or parent who has a serious health condition; or 
- 
Care for the employee’s own serious health condition. 
 
If the need for leave is foreseeable, employees should notify a supervisor 30 days prior 
to taking FMLA leave.  If the need for FMLA leave arises unexpectedly, employees 
should notify a supervisor as soon as practicable, giving as much notice to the company 
as possible.  
 
Employees may be required to provide:  medical certifications supporting the need for 
leave if the leave is due to a serious health condition of the employee or employee’s 
family member; periodic recertification of the serious health condition; and periodic 
reports during the leave regarding the employee’s status and intent to return to work. 
Employees must return to work immediately after the serious health condition ceases, 
and employees who have taken leave because of their own serious health condition 
must submit a fitness-for-duty certification before being allowed to return to work.   
 
Leave may be taken on an intermittent or reduced schedule to care for an illness; yet, 
may not be taken intermittently for the care of a newborn or newly adopted child. 
When leave is taken intermittently, the company may transfer the employee to another 
position with equivalent pay and benefits, which is better suited to periods of absence.  
 
Subject to certain conditions, the employee or the company may choose to use accrued 
paid leave (such as sick leave or vacation leave) concurrent with FMLA leave.  
  
The company will maintain group health insurance coverage for an employee on family 
and medical leave on the same terms as if the employee had continued work.  If 
applicable, arrangements will be made for the employee to pay their share of health 
insurance premiums while on leave.  The company may recover premiums paid to 
maintain health coverage for an employee who fails to return to work from family and 
medical leave. 
 
12
If an employee would like the company to maintain other paid benefits during the 
period of leave, premiums and charges which are partially or wholly paid by the 
employee must continue to be paid by the employee during the leave time. 
Family and medical leave will not result in the loss of any employment benefit accrued 
prior to the date on which the leave commenced.  However, an employee on family and 
medical leave does not continue to accrue benefits (e.g., sick leave or vacation leave) 
during the period of family and medical leave. Questions regarding particular benefits 
should be directed to [enter authorized person’s name]. 
 
Upon returning from FMLA leave, an employee will be restored to his/her original job 
or an equivalent job with equivalent benefits, pay, seniority, and other employment 
terms and conditions as provided by the Family and Medical Leave Act.   
 
If your company has 50 or more employees, you are required to comply with 
the Family and Medical Leave Act. If you are covered, your manual should 
include a FMLA section. For more information on the FMLA, visit the 
Department of Labor’s website at www.dol.gov/esa/whd/fmla/index.htm.  In 
addition, some states and local jurisdictions, including the District of Columbia, 
provide broader family and medical leave coverage to employees, so you should 
consult an attorney regarding applicable state and local laws.  If your company is 
required to comply with the FMLA, you may consider requiring employees to 
exhaust their accrued paid leave at the same time they are on FMLA leave.  
Otherwise, an employee could take up to 12 weeks of FMLA leave in addition to 
all of his/her accrued vacation and sick leave.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.4 
Holidays 
 
The company observes the following holidays: 
- 
New Year’s Day 
- 
Martin Luther King, Jr. Day 
- 
Memorial Day 
- 
Independence Day 
- 
Labor Day 
- 
Thanksgiving  
- 
Christmas Day 
[list other observed holidays] 
 
Holidays are observed on a [paid/unpaid] basis for all eligible employees.  [Full time 
employees are eligible for paid holiday benefits.]  
 
Companies should consult state and local law to determine if there are any 
mandated holidays in the jurisdictions in which they are located. 
 
 
 
13
6.5 
Jury Duty Time Off 
 
The company understands that occasionally employees are called to serve on a jury. 
Employees who are selected for jury duty must provide a copy of their jury summons to 
a supervisor. Time taken for jury duty is granted on a [paid/unpaid] basis. Employees 
released from jury duty with [enter number] hours remaining in the workday, are 
expected to return to work. 
 
6.6 
Voting Time Off 
 
Employees are encouraged to participate in elections. The company grants incremental 
time off to cast a ballot in an election. Voting time off is granted on a [paid/unpaid] 
basis. Should extenuating circumstances arise while voting, notify a supervisor as soon 
as possible.  
 
Most state laws prohibit an employer from taking any disciplinary action against 
employees for taking time off to vote or serve on a jury. Some states even 
require the time off to be granted on a paid basis. If your state requires paid 
jury/voting time off, be sure to provide as much detail as possible about your 
leave provisions. 
 
 
 
 
 
6.7 
Military Leave 
 
Employees called to active military duty, military reserve or National Guard service 
may be eligible to receive time off under the Uniformed Services Employment and 
Reemployment Rights Act of 1994. To receive time off, employees must provide notice 
and a copy of their report orders to an immediate supervisor. Military leave is granted 
on a [paid/unpaid] basis [if leave is on a paid basis, indicate the maximum number of 
days of paid leave to be provided by the company]. Upon return with an honorable 
discharge, an employee may be entitled to reinstatement and any applicable job benefits 
they would have received if present, to the extent provided by law.  
 
Every company, regardless of the number of people employed, is required to 
comply with the Uniformed Services Employment and Reemployment Rights 
Act. Under the Act, employers are prevented from taking disciplinary action 
against an employee because of their military status.  For more information on 
the USERRA, visit the Department of Labor’s website at 
http://www.dol.gov/elaws/vets/userra/mainmenu.asp. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
14
6.8 
Leave of Absence 
 
Regular full-time employees may request an unpaid leave of absence after the exhaustion 
of paid leave. A request for a leave of absence must be submitted in writing in advance to 
the employee's immediate supervisor.   
 
Leave of absences that are granted are unpaid, and will not be considered until an 
employee has exhausted all appropriate accrued leave balances.  Continuation of 
employee benefits during a leave of absence will be addressed on an individual basis, as 
required by law. 
 
Companies should consider establishing a leave of absence policy.  It is a 
common practice for companies to consider employees’ requests for unpaid 
leaves of absence.  In particular, it may be appropriate for a company to allow 
a qualified disabled employee to take additional unpaid leave beyond the 
amount of leave he/she may be entitled to under the Family and Medical Leave 
Act.  As a result, it may make sense to provide employees with a written policy 
on this benefit. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15
Section 7 – Work Performance 
 
7.1 
Expectations  
 
The company expects every employee to act in a professional manner. Satisfactory 
performance of job duties and responsibilities is key to this expectation. Employees 
should attempt to achieve their job objectives, and act with diligence and consideration 
at all times. Poor job performance can result in disciplinary action, up to and including 
termination. 
 
 
7.2 
Reviews 
The company may periodically evaluate an employee’s performance. The goal of a 
performance review is to identify areas where an employee excels and areas that need 
improvement. The company uses performance reviews as a tool to determine pay 
increases, promotions and/or terminations.  
 
All performance reviews are based on merit, achievement and other factors may include 
but are not limited to: 
- 
Quality of work 
- 
Attitude 
- 
Knowledge of work 
- 
Job skills 
- 
Attendance and punctuality 
- 
Teamwork and cooperation 
- 
Compliance with company policy 
- 
Past performance reviews 
- 
Improvement 
- 
Acceptance of responsibility and constructive feedback 
 
Employees should note that a performance review does not guarantee a pay increase or 
promotion.  Written performance evaluations may be made at any time to advise 
employees of unacceptable performance. Evaluations or any subsequent change in 
employment status, position or pay does not alter the employee’s at will-relationship 
with the company.  
 
Forward any questions about performance expectation or evaluation to the supervisor 
conducting the evaluation.  
 
 
 
16
 
Companies that adhere to a performance review policy can avoid problems 
handling “poor performance” terminations. If your company has a review policy, 
it is not necessary to include the whole policy in the handbook. Adding a simple 
timeline of when employees may expect a review is sufficient. 
 
 
 
 
7.3 
Insubordination 
 
Supervisors and employees should interact with mutual respect and common courtesy. 
Employees are expected to take instruction from supervisors or other persons of 
authority. Failure to comply with instructions or unreasonably delaying compliance is 
considered insubordination. Acts of insubordination are subject to disciplinary action, 
up to and including termination.  
 
If an employee disagrees with a supervisor, the employee should first try to mediate the 
situation by explaining their position. If possible, a compromise might be met and 
accusations of insubordination avoided.  
 
17
Section 8 – Discipline Policy 
 
8.1 
Grounds for Disciplinary Action 
 
The company reserves the right to discipline and/or terminate any employee who 
violates company polices, practices or rules of conduct. Poor performance and 
misconduct are also grounds for discipline or termination.  
 
The following actions are unacceptable and considered grounds for disciplinary action. 
This list is not comprehensive; rather, it is meant merely as an example of the types of 
conduct that this company does not tolerate. These actions include, but are not limited 
to: 
- 
Engaging in acts of discrimination or harassment in the workplace; 
- 
Possessing, distributing or being under the influence of illicit controlled 
substances; 
- 
Being under the influence of a controlled substance or alcohol at work, on 
company premises, or while engaged in company business; 
- 
Unauthorized use of company property, equipment, devices or assets; 
- 
Damage, destruction or theft of company property, equipment, devices or assets; 
- 
Removing company property without prior authorization or disseminating 
company information without authorization; 
- 
Falsification, misrepresentation or omission of information, documents or 
records; 
- 
Lying; 
- 
Insubordination or refusal to comply with directives; 
- 
Failing to adequately perform job responsibilities; 
- 
Excessive or unexcused absenteeism or tardiness; 
- 
Disclosing confidential or proprietary company information without permission; 
- 
Illegal or violent activity; 
- 
Falsifying injury reports or reasons for leave; 
- 
Possessing unauthorized weapons on premises; 
- 
Disregard for safety and security procedures; 
- 
Disparaging or disrespecting supervisors and/or co-workers; and 
- 
Any other action or conduct that is inconsistent with company policies, 
procedures, standards or expectations. 
 
This list exhibits the types of actions or events that are subject to disciplinary action. It is 
not intended to indicate every act that could lead to disciplinary action. The company 
reserves the right to determine the severity and extent of any disciplinary action based 
on the circumstances of each case.  
 
18
 
 
8.2 
Procedures 
 
Disciplinary action is any one of a number of options used to correct unacceptable 
behavior or actions. Discipline may take the form of oral warnings, written warnings, 
probation, suspension, demotion, discharge, removal or some other disciplinary action, in 
no particular order.  The course of action will be determined by the company at its sole 
discretion as it deems appropriate.  
 
If your company uses a progressive discipline system, placing that policy in a 
handbook can be binding. You are guarantying to your employees that the company 
follows a set method for discipline each and every time. Companies could become 
liable for not adhering to their own policies in every situation. In addition, progressive 
discipline polices can sometimes defeat the purposes of an at-will employment 
relationship. 
 
When drafting your discipline section, do not over explain the policy or include steps 
that you might not take every time.  If you do plan to include a progressive discipline 
policy in your handbook, have an employment attorney review your submission. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8.3 
Termination 
 
Employment with the company is on an at-will basis and may be terminated 
voluntarily or involuntarily at any time. 
 
Upon termination, an employee is required: 
- 
to continue to work until the last scheduled day of employment; 
- 
to turn in all reports and paperwork required to be completed by the employee 
when due and no later than the last day of work; 
- 
to return all files, documents, equipment, keys, access cards, software or other property 
belonging to the company that are in the employee’s possession, custody or control, and 
turn in all passwords to his/her supervisor; 
- 
to participate in an exit interview as requested by [enter authorized person’s name].   
 
 
19
Section 9 – Health and Safety 
 
9.1 
Workplace Safety 
 
The company takes every reasonable precaution to ensure that employees have a safe 
working environment. Safety measures and rules are in place for the protection of all 
employees. Ultimately, it is the responsibility of each employee to help prevent 
accidents. To ensure the continuation of a safe workplace, all employees should review 
and understand all provisions of the company’s workplace safety policy.  Employees 
should use all safety and protective equipment provided to them, and maintain work 
areas in a safe and orderly manner, free from hazardous conditions. Employees who 
observe an unsafe practice or condition should report it to a supervisor or [enter 
alternate name] immediately.  Employees are prohibited from making threats against 
anyone in connection with his/her work or engaging in violent activities while in the 
employ of the company.  Any questions regarding safety and safe practices should be 
directed to [enter authorized person’s name]. 
 
In the event of an accident, employees must notify a supervisor immediately. Report 
every injury, regardless of how minor, to a supervisor immediately. Physical discomfort 
caused by repetitive tasks must also be reported. For more information about on the job 
injuries, refer to the worker’s compensation section of this handbook. 
 
Employees should recognize any potential fire hazards and be aware of fire escape 
routes and fire drills. Do not block fire exits, tamper with fire extinguishers or otherwise 
create fire hazards.  
 
 
9.2 
Workplace Security 
 
Employees must be alert and aware of any potential dangers to themselves or their 
coworkers. Take every precaution to ensure that your surroundings are safe and secure. 
Guard personal belongings and company property. Visitors should be escorted at all 
times. Report any suspicious activity to a supervisor immediately.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20
9.3 
Emergency Procedures 
 
In the event of an emergency, dial 911 immediately. If you hear a fire alarm or other 
emergency alert system, proceed quickly and calmly to the nearest exit. Once the 
building has been evacuated, only a supervisor may authorize employees to reenter.  
 
Expand this section to include any industry specific safety guidelines your 
company must follow, such as OSHA standards and regulations.  Include the 
name of the accident contact person and the location of safety posters that 
your company is required to post. If you are in a highly regulated industry, 
consider providing a separate employee safety manual. If you have company 
vehicles, include a section on accident reporting. 
 
21
Section 10 - Employee Benefits 
 
This handbook contains descriptions of some of our current employee benefits.  Many 
of the company’s benefit plans are described in more formal plan documents available 
from [enter authorized person’s name].  In the event of any inconsistencies between this 
handbook or any other oral or written description of benefits and a formal plan 
document, the formal plan document will govern. 
 
Even with the disclaimer language provided above, it is important to conform 
the benefit plans described in the handbook with the company’s formal plan 
documents.  It is not necessary to provide detailed information about the 
benefit plans in the handbook, but it may be helpful to provide general 
information on the types of benefits provided and where employees can find 
more detailed information on the benefits provided. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10.1 
Health Insurance 
 
The company makes group health benefits available to eligible employees and their 
family members. Eligible employees are full time employees who have worked for 
[enter time] months. Part time employees are eligible if they work at least [enter hours] 
hours per week and have been employed for [enter time] months.  
 
Health benefits are paid in part by the company. The remainder of the costs is the 
employee’s responsibility. Employees can receive details about benefits provided, 
contribution rates and eligibility from [enter authorized person’s name].   
 
  
10.2 
Retirement Plan 
 
The company participates in a 401(k) plan so that employees may save a portion of their 
earnings for retirement. Regular employees who have worked at least [enter hours] for 
[enter months] are eligible to participate.  Employees may elect to make regular 
contributions to the 401(k) plan up to the maximum amount allowed by federal law. 
 
Contact [enter authorized person’s name] for detailed information regarding eligibility, 
employee contributions, vesting period or employer contributions. More information 
can also be found in the plan summary description, which is available from [enter 
benefits coordinator name].  If there are any inconsistencies between this handbook and any 
of the Summary Plan Descriptions, the Summary Plan Descriptions shall govern.  The company 
reserves the right to modify or terminate any or all of its retirement benefits or to change benefit 
providers at any time with or without notice. 
 
22
This section should briefly describe the company’s offered benefits. A detailed 
account of the plan’s characteristics is not necessary. Simply include a basic 
description of the benefits offered, the eligibility requirements and a contact 
name. To provide more information about a specific plan, create a benefits 
handbook or ask the plan administrator for an informational booklet to present 
to eligible employees. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10.3 
Workers’ Compensation 
 
As required by law, the company provides workers’ compensation benefits for the protection of 
employees with work-related injuries or illnesses.  
 
Workers’ compensation insurance provides coverage to employees who receive job-
related injuries or illnesses. If an employee is injured or becomes ill as a result of his/her 
job, it is the employee’s responsibility to immediately notify a supervisor of their injury 
in order to receive benefits. Report every illness or injury to a supervisor, regardless of 
how minor it appears. The company will advise the employee of the procedure for 
submitting a workers’ compensation claim.  If necessary, injured employees will be 
referred to a medical care facility. Employees should retain all paperwork provided to 
them by the medical facility.  Failure to report a work-related illness or injury promptly could 
result in denial of benefits.  An employee’s report should contain as many details as possible, 
including the date, time, description of the illness or injury, and the names of any witnesses. 
 
A separate insurance company administers the worker’s compensation insurance. 
Representatives of this company may contact injured employees regarding their 
benefits under the plan.  Additional information regarding workers’ compensation is 
available from [enter authorized person’s name].  
 
 
Worker’s compensation can be required and the laws vary from state to state. 
Check with your state worker’s compensation agency to determine if you are 
required to carry worker’s compensation insurance.   
 
 
 
 
10.4 
Disability Coverage 
 
Disability insurance provides partial paycheck reimbursement for times of serious 
illness or injury which leads to total disability. Total disability is defined as the inability 
to perform any job function as a result of the injury or illness. Employees who have 
worked for [enter number] months are eligible for disability insurance coverage. To 
qualify for benefits, the period of total disability must exceed [enter number] days. 
 
23
Coverage extends for [enter number] days of disability. Employees must exhaust any 
sick leave benefits before being eligible for disability leave coverage.  
 
Disability benefits are calculated as [enter percentage] of an employees base salary. Any 
payments received from worker’s compensation or state disability will result in an 
equal decrease in disability benefits. Disability benefits are subject to employment 
withholding provisions.  
 
The employee is responsible for notifying a supervisor of their disability, expected date 
of return, and the name of their attending physician. The company may request that an 
independent medical provider perform an examination. In addition, the company may 
require a medical release form prior to returning to work. For more information 
regarding disability benefits, contact [enter authorized person’s name].  If there are any 
inconsistencies between this handbook and any of the Summary Plan Descriptions, the Summary 
Plan Descriptions shall govern.  The company reserves the right to modify or terminate any or all 
of the benefits or to change benefit providers at any time with or without notice. 
 
Disability insurance is generally not required, but if your company provides 
disability benefits, include a brief description in your handbook. 
 
Companies with more than 15 employees are required to comply with the 
American’s with Disabilities Act. For more information about the ADA, visit the 
ADA home page at http://www.usdoj.gov/crt/ada/adahom1.htm. 
 
24
Section 11 - Termination 
 
11.1 
Voluntary Termination  
 
The company recognizes that personal situations may arise which require a voluntary 
termination of employment. Should this occur, the company requests that the employee 
provide two weeks advance notice in writing. This request does not alter an employee’s 
at-will relationship with the company.  
 
All rights and privileges of employment with the company terminate upon the date of 
separation. As further discussed in Section 8.3, terminating employees are required to 
return all company property assigned to them. Failure to do so may result in the 
withholding of their final paycheck.  
 
11.2 
Final Paycheck 
 
Employees who terminate employment with the company will be given their final pay 
check [enter time required by state law]. Should the employee be unable to personally 
retrieve their paycheck, it will be mailed to the address on file.  
 
 
 
 
Most states require that a terminated employee receive their paycheck within a 
certain number of days after termination. Consult with an employment attorney 
to determine what your state requires.   
 
 
 
11.3 
COBRA Continuation of Health Benefits 
 
Under the federal Consolidated Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act (COBRA), a 
qualified employee who terminates employment (for reasons other than gross 
misconduct on the employee’s part) or who loses health and dental coverage due to a 
reduction in work hours may temporarily continue group health and dental coverage 
for him/herself, his/her spouse, and any covered dependent children at the full 
premium rate plus administrative fees.  That eligibility normally extends for a period of 
eighteen (18) months from the qualifying date.  For more information regarding 
COBRA health insurance benefits, see [enter authorized person’s name]. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25
 
11.4 
Exit Interview 
 
The company may request an exit interview upon notice of termination. The purpose of 
the exit interview is to complete necessary forms, collect company property and discuss 
employment experiences with the company.  
 
26
Acknowledgement of Receipt for Employee Handbook 
(Employee Copy – Keep with handbook) 
 
 
I acknowledge that I have received a copy of the Employee Handbook. I understand 
that I am responsible for reading the information contained in the Handbook.  
 
I understand that the handbook is intended to provide me with a general overview 
of the company’s policies and procedures. I acknowledge that nothing in this 
handbook is to be interpreted as a contract, expressed or implied, or an inducement 
for employment, nor does it guarantee my employment for any period of time.  
 
I understand and accept that my employment with the company is at-will. I have the 
right to resign at any time with or without cause, just as the company may terminate 
my employment at any time with or without cause or notice, subject to applicable 
laws.  I understand that nothing in the handbook or in any oral or written statement 
alters the at-will relationship, except by written agreement signed by the employee 
and [enter authorized person’s name].   
 
I acknowledge that the company may revise, suspend, revoke, terminate, change or 
remove, prospectively or retroactively, any of the policies or procedures outlined in 
this handbook or elsewhere, in whole or in part, with or without notice at any time, 
at the company’s sole discretion.  
 
 
_________________________________ 
(Signature of Employee) 
 
__________ 
(Date) 
 
_________________________________ 
(Company Representative) 
 
 
27
Acknowledgement of Receipt for Employee Handbook 
(Employer Copy – Detach and retain for records) 
 
 
I acknowledge that I have received a copy of the Employee Handbook. I understand 
that I am responsible for reading the information contained in the Handbook.  
 
I understand that the handbook is intended to provide me with a general overview 
of the company’s policies and procedures. I acknowledge that nothing in this 
handbook is to be interpreted as a contract, expressed or implied, or an inducement 
for employment, nor does it guarantee my employment for any period of time.  
 
I understand and accept that my employment with the company is at-will. I have the 
right to resign at any time with or without cause, just as the company may terminate 
my employment at any time with or without cause or notice, subject to applicable 
laws.  I understand that nothing in the handbook or in any oral or written statement 
alters the at-will relationship, except by written agreement signed by the employee 
and [enter authorized person’s name].    
 
I acknowledge that the company may revise, suspend, revoke, terminate, change or 
remove, prospectively or retroactively, any of the policies or procedures of the 
company, whether outlined in this handbook or elsewhere, in whole or in part, with 
or without notice at any time, at the company’s sole discretion.  
 
 
_________________________________ 
(Signature of Employee) 
 
__________ 
(Date) 
 
_________________________________ 
(Company Representative)
 
28
Companies may also consider instituting some of the following policies, 
depending on the nature of the company’s business and workforce: 
 
- 
Confidentiality 
- 
Conflict of Interest 
- 
Intellectual Property Ownership 
- 
Outside Employment 
- 
Additional Benefits, such as Training or Education Reimbursement 
- 
Expense Reporting 
- 
Use of Company Vehicles 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
29
NFIB Legal Foundation
1201 F Street, NW
Suite 200
Washington, D.C. 20004
(800) 552-6342
